You don't mind?
No, I don't mind.
I'm talking to Professor Harold Bloom.
No, I was just thinking, when I mentioned Alexandria, that in some sense, what Alexandria was... Ah, let me just get this right here.
What Alexandria was to an older culture, the fall of the book culture itself, that is to say,
We are Alexander... Somebody got the wrong limit.
No, I... I believe, and increasingly, that people like you and myself, Nicholas, for whom books are the best part of life and have been the best part of life, that essentially we live in Alexandria.
We live...
and an Alexandria of the mind.
And the best name for it, so far as I know, would be Alexandria.
That is to say, that vision of a literary culture is essentially an Alexandria, a Hellenistic nation.
And it appears to me
In that sense, it depended upon the inner ear, which is, after all, what matters most in reading.
That an age in which success of the motion picture screen, television screen, and now the computer screen, and now the projections out from the community, you know, the virtual reality into which we are going, dooms literary culture, as we Alexandrians have known it.
This is a departure for you.
You didn't feel this way ten years ago, I don't think.
No, I think ten years ago I was already very distressed.
You were distressed, but I read your Paris Review interview, and you were hoping, I guess, that this would live on the screen, I guess.
I was hoping one could fight.
one can not only fight the age of the visual, but fight what I would call the treason of the critics, the absolute sell-out of the supposed literary culture of the academies.
But ten years later, I am more quietistic.
I guess you've just finished reading that book of mine.
Very kind of you.
But it is, in a sense, a quietistic book, because it does not offer itself any hope.
I end with a sermon, but I make very clear, as I start the sermon, I say, look, if you are a professing
personage in any mode of belief whatsoever, I have no authority to address you.
And you learn how to listen if you don't want to.
If you are, however, some kind of a seeker, if in that more profound sense you are unchurched, perhaps something that I am saved will find you.
I suppose for me there is a deep affinity.
Literary culture is the invention of Alexandria.
Gnosticism appears to have been the invention of Alexandrian Jewry to begin with.
And I would mean though it may have roots in Palestinian Jewry and in Samaria of a slightly earlier period.
But I think that Gnosticism and literary culture
Gnosticism is almost the religion of illiterary culture.
And as one dies, the other in some sense dies also.
You had an experience in the 60s with an angel, didn't you, you said?
Well, not a terrifying angel.
The covering cherub.
I had a dream at dawn on my 37th birthday.
I was coming out of a dream in which a horrible, huge mimshak heruv, as it is called in the Hebrew Bible, the covering cherub, was suffocating me.
The wings were suffocating me.
War, I'm still not sure.
I puzzled about it for a long time afterwards.
I'm still not sure.
Of course, you've written and lectured and interviewed at great length on Shakespeare, of course, but on Freud, and you've discussed your own therapy.
Dreams come in tough.
The question begs to be asked, have you tried to look at that dream in any way other than just a dream?
Well, for me it was a pragmatic dream and its consequences.
In a book of mine, a collection put together of selected writings, Poetics of Influence, edited with an introduction by John Hollander for the volume of New and Selected Criticism, which was published back around 1988 or so, I reprinted because
A copy of it was found by my friend Joe Trapp, the librarian then at the Warburg Institute in London.
Gumbridge had heard me give this strange Githyramb-like long, weird lecture called The Covering Cherub or Poetic Influence at the Society for the Humanities at Cornell, where my wife and I and our little boys had gone to spend the year
starting with September 1968.
And it was something that I wrote starting on July 11th.
In 1967, directly I came up out of that dream.
And then in revised and much more rationalized form, it became the Klinomen, or first chapter,
of a little book called The Anxiety of Influence in January 1973.
And in some sense, it changed my work and my life forever, that dream, if it was a dream.
If I had, I suppose, a deeper,
gnosis of myself, and therefore had more spiritual self-confidence than I easily have.
I would probably say, my dear Nicholas, that it wasn't a dream, but it was some sort of angelic visitation.
It was certainly frighteningly tactile, but it seemed to take place between sleep and waking.
or since, and it has governed everything I've done now for 30 years.
Since my work changed radically, with that covering Charupo, Poetic Influence, Dithyaram, it became the seed of everything I've written ever since, in one form or another.
Not just all the works about poetic influence, but...
curious religious turn, if that's what it is.
That started in the 1990s, or late 1980s, and that would ruin the sacred truth, and had gone before it, and then went on to the Book of Jay and the American religion, and the sort of underlying argument to the Western canon, and now this very strange book.
This is a weird book, because as I myself... You can call it weird.
As I myself realized...
Only a couple of people besides you have read it as yet, because it's been held up.
It's going to be published next Wednesday, on September the 4th.
But I don't think it'll be in bookstores until next Wednesday.
I'll wait a couple of weeks, by the way, before I get my piece up.
Sure, sure.
I would like it to be in bookstores.
I don't think it can be in bookstores until September the 4th, because the printer made a mistake in that opening epigraph, a mistake after everything was all done.
It wasn't a...
They tried to fancily rearrange that opening epigraph from Lawrence Durrell.
And in doing it, they changed the word question into questie.
And I shrugged my shoulders.
I said, this is an atrocity.
I said to my editor, Cindy Spiegel, and through her to my publisher at Riverhead, Susan Peterson, what can we do?
I said, we've got 33,000 copies of this, the first printing.
And Susan Peterson said, no, she wouldn't stand for it.
She was going to send it back to the printer, and at the printer's expense, they were going to have to tip in 33,000 epigraph pages.
And I said, but my dear, that will take like three, four weeks.
The book isn't even going to be in bookstores on publication date the 4th, and you're not going to be able to stop certain reviews.
And indeed, there was an article already, I'm told, though I haven't seen it, although not a review.
But they didn't pick up on that.
There was an article in the Baltimore... Pardon me, I'm just checking
long before there can be books in bookstores there are as of today there's no book in a bookstore anywhere in North America it will I'm told this morning when I complained about this or worried about this over the phone they assured me that it would land as they put it in the bookstores simultaneously with their other September the 4th publication which is of course printed four times the amount Mr. Art Buchwald's memoir about how much he loved Paris
I talked to him about that book.
Art Buchwald and I are supposed to hit the bookstores together on publication date, September the 4th.
So only a couple of people have read it, Nick.
You've read it, and my friend Jonathan Spence, the Chinese historian, and one or two others.
And Jonathan pointed out to me what I knew already, that it's no genre whatsoever.
I mean, what is the book?
I wouldn't know how to...
I don't know how to describe the book.
It's not really a book about religion.
Is it a meditation?
Maybe.
I have no idea of qualities.
I don't know.
At one point I remember early on in it, being puzzled by it myself, I actually said that not just the last chapter or section of this is a Gnostic sermon, maybe in some sense this entire book is a Gnostic sermon.
I said, that's probably the answer.
It's a sermon.
It's sort of a short book, but a long sermon of a Gnostic kind.
But of course, a Gnostic sermon is a choke.
It's a deliberate choke.
There cannot be a Gnostic sermon.
There can be a Protestant sermon.
There can be a Judaic sermon.
There can be a Muslim sermon.
There could be a Catholic sermon.
There can be, I suppose, a Buddhist sermon.
I know very little about Buddhism.
But there cannot be a Gnostic servant.
There's no one to give it and no one to listen to it.
And no place to hold it.
Where did this come from?
I mean, the time certainly anticipates, you know, a new millennium.
Is this what inspired you, do you think, to cut the creative juices flowing?
No, no, it goes all the way back.
I think you've already told me about the... When I was a little boy, a big bar mitzvah at 13, I was already in rebellion.
You know, they gave me a high orthodox education.
My parents, after all, were very pious East European Jews, and I was always getting into fights with the rabbis.
When I was 11 and 12 years old, I was having terrible fights with them because I was not interpreting a sculpture the way Rashi would have me interpret them.
scripture I remember asking a rabbi when I was 12 years old why God tried to murder Moses and I was given the great answer that Rashi gives because he stops at night when God has sent him down into Egypt and carries
And, of course, that's not in the text.
The Hebrew makes perfectly clear that if you are going through the wilderness of Zin, the Negev, at night, of course you make an encampment.
So Moses makes an encampment there at night, and then as the text shockingly says, Yahweh tries to murder him, tries to kill him for no reason whatsoever.
And even as a 12-year-old, and that is 54 years ago, I got into a terrible fight with the rabbis about that.
I said, there's something very wrong here.
And they said, no, no, no.
There's nothing wrong here.
So I guess that's always been in me.
I've always been.
As far back as I can remember, even before I knew that there was such a thing as a Jewish Gnostic, even before I first heard of
what the Talmud calls the Minim, who are obviously the Jewish Gnostics of the first two centuries of the common era.
I was one already, but it did get all mixed in with a passion for poetry, as I explained early on in that book.
But then the occasion of the book, not the inspiration for it,
The book in that sense, you know, has been moving around in me for more than half a century.
But the occasion for the book was my bemusement.
I used to sit around with Glenn Hartley, our mutual agent, splendid man as you know, and have conversations with him in which I would brood out loud about the madness of the obsession with angels in the United States throughout the late 80s and all through the 90s.
And then this insane preoccupation with the near-death experience, on which I would say the best thing that's been said is my remark somewhere in that book where I say, well, all of life is near-death experience.
Which we see for under life, of course.
That can almost be my lead, you know.
And then I've always been fascinated by Freud, though increasingly rebellious towards him,
And I reread The Interpretation of Dreams a couple of years ago and started to read Freud again in later essays and dreams and telepathy and so on.
And suddenly it struck me there was something very odd there.
So I started getting much more interested in dreams than I'd ever been before in the literature dreams and learned a great deal about it.
And I finally had to say to myself, here is a Western tradition, a dream interpretation, going back 1800, 1900 years before Freud, including a Jewish tradition of dream interpretation.
You know, all of that material, but I cited from the Talmud, and much, much more than I had time to cite, from the Zohar.
the major text of the Kabbalah.
And it just seems to me much closer to what I intuitively understand about dreams or what I have learned about dreams by listening to other people's dreams or the way I've encountered dreams in literature.
It does seem to me that Freud is neglecting
the ultimate aspect of dreams, which is that they have a, not a narrowly predictive function, but they do have a kind of apotropaic function.
Something I didn't really talk about in that book, I mean, they're a warding off matter.
They do deal with both good and bad things that are coming, and they defend
against it.
And then I got very fascinated, I must say, as the book shows, with, um, that strange Talmudist and Kabbalist, uh, Joseph Karoff, or Svad, with his crazy Magid, his crazy answering angel.
And then, I think that's what really got the book started, because I started thinking, I know this guy, Werblowski, who'd written the basic book on Karoff,
I remembered some conversations I'd had with him.
And then I'm a good friend of Moshe Ido, who I think is the great living Kabbalah scholar, the only one who's a real rival to and corrective to Sholem, whom I also knew and liked very much.
I was talking to Moshe Ido about it, and I gradually saw that what I wanted to do, if I could do it, was to write a book on...
angels, near-death experiences, dreams, this whole current sure and awry.
But to put it in the context, I thought of the sages who had really understood these things out of a whole series of Western traditions, all of them ultimately allied by hermeticism, or hermitism, which is sort of secular, or by hermitism.
a Judeo-Christian Muslim gnosis.
I didn't realize I hadn't read much Henri Corban at that point.
I then read all of him, both French and English, and then started to look at the text he had translated into French, since I cannot read Iranian or Arabic.
But I became more and more fascinated by that special branch of the Sufis,
You know, the Iranian Shiite Sufis, upon whom Korban was the great modern scholar.
And it seemed to me that they had more to say in a kind of breathtakingly clear way about these matters in a less so contradictory form than Kabbalah did or than perhaps earlier versions of Gnosticism did
But I still had no idea, Nicholas, what that book would turn out to be.
I mean, I didn't think I was writing a sermon.
I thought I would write a gently humorous account trying to say, look, this New Age jazz is no good and this popular debasement is no good either.
But the reason why we are moved by it on many levels
and, you know, people of great subtlety as well as people, or shall we say rather less, is that this has always been the tradition of Gnosis.
This has always been a way of getting at these things.
Well, I still did not understand the book as I wrote it.
For such a short book,
It surprised me.
It took two full years.
It took as long to write that book as it did that huge book on the Western Canon.
That's amazing.
It took me two full years, because I couldn't quite understand.
I kept writing it and rewriting it.
Were you intimidated by it in any way?
No, I just couldn't figure out what I was doing.
And after a while, I think, you know, Goethe once said beautifully, Es dictet en mir, that is to say,
I don't write the poems.
They write themselves in me.
Obviously, I'm not writing a poem or a prose poem.
But finally, this wrote itself, but more or less sort of sometimes against me or against parts of me.
I really have no idea what is going to happen to this book, because I take it for granted that most reviewers will just be outraged.
Oh, okay.
You don't think so?
Well, why should we be outraged?
Well, if they are... If they are, you know, pious Protestants, whether mainline or sects, or if they are pious Catholics or they are pious Jews, you know, they will say, how dare he say this sort of thing.
But also, I just think
what I call the weirdness of the book.
You seem to have some misgivings here.
Oh, I have a lot of misgivings about this book.
I guess that's why I got upset when that mistake showed up, and Susan Peterson said she wouldn't let it stand, even though it meant the book would be in the bookstores three to four weeks later.
And she overruled me on it, and I said, well, be it on your head, you know.
Um, because I think we may get the weird situation that there'll be books and articles out there.
I mean, there'll be reviews and articles out there, but there won't be any books.
Yeah, that's terrible.
You don't want that to happen.
Well, it might happen, because... It might happen.
Now, did they tip in 33,000?
Yeah.
Wow.
That's not an inexpensive... Well, they didn't pay, though.
I understand, but I mean... The prints are paid.
Um, but they're insisting on it.
Um,
I would have been willing, and I would have been happy with the blemish, but I would have gone along with it.
But they wouldn't do it.
So I feel snaked good about this book already, and of course that's just superstition.
I just feel, though, that I don't know where they'll find reviewers for it.
I don't know...
Well, you wonder if they'll find reviewers, but you must be, your last two books have been certifiable bestsellers, which is amazing.
Well, two out of three.
The Book of Jay was a bestseller, and The Western Canon.
In between was a book that I think was better than either, the one called The American Religion, and that was not a bestseller.
And that was harshly handled.
By the establishments of the group?
Yeah, yeah.
This book is not quite like that, but it's closer to that than it is to the other two.
But where you express justifiably this anxiety about the dearth of readers, and yet these very deep books are being bought and read.
How do you explain that?
I don't understand it at all, Nicholas.
I don't even understand.
I can't deal with the letters I've been getting for the last three, four, five years.
by getting an enormous number of letters every day.
Sometimes they're nasty.
I just throw them away very frequently.
They're sensitive and good-natured and even gracious and grateful.
But I haven't got time and energy to answer them.
I'm too embarrassed to answer them anyway.
I don't know what to say.
Are the nasty ones basically from the Western canon, I would imagine?
Well, no, they're from everything.
And why do you work?
There's a certain amount of anti-Semitism.
I get some anti-Semitic letters, and I may get some more about this one.
After all, I've written, I don't know if you ever saw it, a couple of years ago, two, three, four years ago, I wrote another Gnostic sermon, a short one,
by Harper San Francisco at the end of their edition of the Gospel of Thomas, done by Martin Mayer.
And I've gotten a certain number of nasty letters about that.
And I guess I'll get nastier letters about this.
I mean, if you say many times in the course of a book,
that there were really, in effect, just two Christians.
One was Jesus, and the other was his brother, James the Just.
And they appeared to have been Gnostics.
Do you smile when you write these?
That's kind of... I don't know whether to smile or not.
I don't know why I... Well, I mean, it may well be that a year from now, or even three months from now, I wish I hadn't written this book.
I don't know.
I really feel there's a jinx on it already.
I think it's a very fine book, mind you.
I mean, I read it through when I got a first printed copy of it, in spite of that horrible questie rather than question.
I felt two things about it.
One, even though it was such a personal book, I didn't feel I'd written it.
And secondly, I felt it was a very fine book, probably the best book I'd ever written, but...
I also thought, God help me.
I just think they're going to line up to take shots at me.
But they've been doing that anyway.
They've been doing that all the time.
Anyway, and of course, by now, I'm 66, and it rolls off me like the water off the proverbial duck, because, you know, you can take only so many shots after that.
You don't feel it anymore.
And besides, what can they do to me by now?
They've said everything they can already.
I mean, the sheer nastiness of the New York Times magazine, which I considered suing about, where they were inventing a sex life for me with female students, which I, in fact, did not have.
It was pretty vicious stuff.
I will never forgive Mr. James Atlas, who... When was this?
This was a dreadful fellow, but goes back a little ways.
The New York Times Magazine, when the Western Canon was published, assigned a nasty little hitman.
I've met Atlas, because he has a little guy.
Oh, no, no.
Atlas was the editor.
Oh, Atlas.
The guy he assigned was a nasty little guy named Begley, the son of the novelist Louis Begley.
Yeah, Begley's son.
Yeah, Adam Begley.
And this Adam Begley did a hateful piece on me, which I didn't read, but people told me what was in it.
Um...
It was a personal piece, I gather.
It was a nasty piece.
And it... I don't know it.
Well... No, but I'm just... And I went back to a very nasty piece.
When I was recovering from both bleeding ulcers and a heart attack, when I suggested what I was doing, I stupidly gave an interview to a hatchet guy from Gentleman's Quarterly many years ago, and he wrote a violently nasty piece about me, full of lies.
And, I mean, it was horrible.
So, you know, one has already been so vituperated that, in a way, one is now armored against anything.
There isn't that kind of thing that bothers me in connection with this book.
I just wonder, once it gets into bookstores and whatever kind of reviews or notices it does or doesn't get,
I just wonder, um, I'm not sure who the readers are for this book.
I'm not sure whether they're the same people.
Well, you've had your readers, but we certainly have readers who read you.
By now, I think I'll probably have a certain number of readers.
Um, whether the people who bought and read the Reston Canon and, uh, the Book of Jay and some other stuff will buy and read this, I don't know.
I guess I'll have to find out.
Um,
What it was intended for, it may just be... I tried to make it, as you can tell as you read it, that's why I had to rewrite it so much, I tried to make it not just as lucid as possible, but as simple as possible.
It's very clear.
I was reading it to my wife last night.
But what is writing about matters about which no one has ever been clear, if I may say so.
I mean, you write about the astral body, or you write about resurrection and so on,
and you write about it with clarity, and you're doing a sort of spooky thing.
And I felt spooky as I read through the book.
I thought, that's a very interesting, you know, technical solution I found for the difficulty of how to present that, but I had to keep asking myself, will, you know, there are all these people who buy these terrible New Age books, who read
Real garbage is like, what is the thing called, the Celestine Prophecy, which I can't get through a sentence of.
There are these people who read all this crap about angels, who read all this garbage about near-death experiences, who read all this incredibly bad psychic dream stuff.
And I was asking myself, is it possible to get people...
who fill up on this drivel, who really are questing for something, who have a kind of authentic drive towards trying to understand what it is that these matters represent.
Is it possible to so write the book that they could read it?
I don't know what the answer to that is.
I'm wondering if
particular crowd, these people who are reading the New Age, who are looking for the simple answer.
Sure.
I wonder if they're up to reading this book.
Well, I wonder also.
I kept it as simple as possible, but it doesn't offer any answers.
The writing is very lucid and clear.
The message remains quite deep and profound.
The message is a troubling one, and the message is a
I guess the message is double.
If I had to summarize it, Nick, I would say the two Muslim world things in the book, and they feed into each other.
On the one hand, that notion which I take from Henry Corban's account of the Sufis, of what he calls the imaginal world, that sort of middle realm between the transcendental and the empirical, which I think is akin to imaginative literature, though it isn't quite the same thing.
And in trying to rely upon that as being no more or less real, in both the empirical and the transcendental, I pose one kind of a problem.
And then by saying that, the ultimate home of the imaginal is, after all, in your relationship to yourself.
Isn't your sense that there is some part of you
which is better and older and more original than the rest of you, you know, in invoking what Emerson really meant by self-reliance.
What got you going on Gingrich and Mrs. Huffington in the book?
I mean, and you keep coming back.
You must use at least ten different words to describe Dean Gingrich.
I mean, modifications obviously.
And this is Glenn's client, too.
He's so nocesome.
I suppose...
Because I really think he is a right-wing Gnostic, though he doesn't know he's a Gnostic.
He thinks he's some sort of orthodox Christian.
But with his obsession with information, with his aversion to matter and energy, as it were, in favor of information, with his astonishing... I mean, I think he's a very evil man.
Very dreadful man.
I quite agree.
I've had a number of fights with better men about this.
They begged me to take out all mentions to him.
But I felt that he belongs there, just as Ralph Reed belongs there, and Pat Robertson belongs there.
And Mrs. Huffington.
Twice, by the way.
I think they all are.
I've had lunch with her.
Well, years ago.
I interviewed her on the Maria Callas book, which was terrible.
See, I tried to read a thing called The Third Instinct or The Fourth Instinct.
My God, is that a piece of New Age nonsense.
I mean, it's rock bottom.
She's a dangerous woman.
Oh, she's an awful woman.
She's ruthless, actually.
Well, I'm sure she would like to do me an old turn after this book.
You're never going to let her representing her now, too.
I don't know if you know that, too.
That's absolutely true, yeah.
Glenn and Lynn are representing Mrs. Huxchips.
Oh, yes.
This is hilarious.
But, of course, you know, even though they are lovely people, even though they are lovely people and wonderful agents, and I regard them as family, as my son has done, this book is dedicated to them, as you probably saw.
Glenn and Lynn are
We long since agreed, my wife and I, on the one hand, and Glenn and Len and Len, and though we all love one another, we agree that we would never discuss politics again.
Glenn and Len are about as right-wing as you can be without being fascist.
Well, this is all off the record between us, but when the Gingrich book came out, I'm probably one of the few journalists in America who declined an opportunity to interview him.
I said, no, I'm not going to give this man ink, free ink.
He is a very evil man.
You know, I can go so far.
He, Ralph Reed, and Pat Robinson are really a triple-headed beast.
I mean, if there is Satan in the United States now, to be serious for a moment, it is those three.
That's profound evil.
It outrages me more than wearing that ex-libris tie.
Yes, yes.
But I have that same tie.
No, no, no, no.
But I really felt they had to be in the book because, you know...
And you can't worry about who your agent represents.
No!
Who the hell is going to worry about that?
That's right.
Well, I must say that now they've gone too far, and they didn't tell me.
How interesting.
Are they on the hospital?
Please don't tell them I told you.
And they're also representing her sister, who's trying to do a children's book.
Oh, my God.
And what book of Ariana's are they representing?
I don't know.
I have no idea.
They've got every right winger in the country.
And then they've got you and me.
We are the illiberal Democrats.
They really have, I mean, they have worse garbage than that, you know.
Worse garbage than even Gingrich and Huffington.
They've got this monster, David Brock, who's winging out a book, which they're touting, called The Seduction of Hillary Romance.
And he's the one who did the Anita Carol Bush thing.
He is.
Well, he's a hit man.
He's a hit man.
He's vicious.
He's crazy.
And they encourage him.
What can we do?
Glenn and Lynn are very good agents.
Glenn has more literary sensibility.
than any so-called literary agent in the world today.
I mean, he suggested Shep Ruhlin's book.
I mean, he actually came up with it.
Glenn has a profound mind, has a vast love and knowledge of 17th century literature and poetry in general.
Uh, Lynn is a profoundly cultured person.
What?
It's interesting, that kind of politics.
They have no social compassion whatsoever.
I mean, they're out of the University of Chicago.
Yeah, they have no social compassion whatsoever.
They don't care about the insult to the ninjas.
They don't care about the downtrodden.
They are, uh... Well, anyway, we love them dearly, and... They are lovely people.
They're wonderful, and they certainly stuck by me in my moment.
They are lovely people, and they are the best possible literary agents.
They are very loyal.
And they understand the books that you read?
And I am, in all questions of my work, absolutely loyal to them.
But that doesn't mean that I, for one moment, condone their ghastly politics, and I will certainly make fun of them on the score of Arianna Huffington, and I won't tell them who tells me.
I won't tell him.
I'll just say, the rumor mill tells me, kids.
They're going to know for sure.
No, I won't do it immediately.
I told him I was talking to him yesterday.
I told him I was going to see you.
It doesn't matter.
What's there to be ashamed of?
No, no, no, no, no.
They don't take a living.
That's right.
It's so funny.
Let's go back.
We started, you had this stuff.
You told me the first time we spoke that
One reason you're going to keep teaching in this department of one... Fear of madness.
Fear of madness.
Fear of isolation, fear, you know.
But I think you also feel that after me, who's... Oh, there's nothing.
I mean, the older generation here has now entirely retired, and they were a very distinguished group from the teaching of literature.
The survivors are myself and my old friend, the poet John Hollander.
who's a geezer a year older than myself, 67 to my 66.
There are some good younger people here, including my former students, David Bromwich and Leslie Brisbane.
But I don't really see my replacement on the horizon.
Not even here, but anywhere, perhaps.
Anywhere.
And therefore...
That's another reason to go on teaching.
It may sound like arrogance, but I don't think it's arrogance.
I'm a dinosaur, and the lion will be extinct after me.
Okay.
What were your reactions when you heard, was it last year, that you can now get a degree in English literature at Georgetown University?
Oh, no.
You're not being required to study Shakespeare.
My dear Nicholas.
Nicholas.
You can get a degree in English literature, I believe, anywhere in the world today, both English-speaking and non-English-speaking, almost anywhere.
There'd be a few exceptions, like Yale, and I guess still Harvard, though I don't know that for a fact, and maybe Notre Dame.
There are a few conservative universities around, but there aren't many, relatively conservative.
Not that Harvard is very conservative anymore.
But, my God...
There are people now who get doctorates in English literature.
Who have ever studied Shakespeare.
Who have read Lacan, Derrida, Foucault, Lyotard, all of this garbage.
Know it by heart, backwards, and poets, Lady Strauss, what you will, and have never read Shakespeare, have never read John Milton, have never read Geoffrey Chaucer, have never read Edmund Spencer.
I've never read Wordsworth.
I've literally never read the greatest poets in the language.
That's just the way things are.
It shouldn't be called English Literature anymore.
It shouldn't be called Literature.
These are, in fact, what they're beginning to call themselves.
These are departments of cultural studies.
And as I kept saying until I am blue in the face, so there's no point in saying it anymore, the only way...
that the serious study of literature is going to survive anywhere in the world, will be if eventually these rascals and all the deans who support them and all the journalists outside who support them led us on the model of what we now call classics departments, a little group of four or five professors who teach Greek and Latin literature, on the model of that, let's have very small departments of...
literature, and huge service departments of cultural studies.
So, you know, they can teach theme parks and Batman comics and rock music and hip-hop and all this stuff.
And let there be, at every major university or college, let there be three or four or five men and women who will teach Chaucer and Shakespeare and Milton and Spencer.
But it's not going to happen.
They wouldn't dream of allowing it.
I mean, are people just not moved by literature anymore?
Well, I don't think that's true.
I think that it's moved outside the academy, just as it's moved outside the journalistic world.
I think there are a lot of people out there.
These are the people who write menards.
These are the people who bought and read the Western canon.
I guess that's my puzzle.
But I'm getting back to an early thing we were talking about, Nick, about why I'm so uneasy about this book.
At the Western Canon, I knew I was going to take it on the chin from all sides, right and left, but that was great.
And that was fun.
Yeah.
I also knew that I knew what I was doing.
That is to say, I am a lifelong student of literature.
Yale.
I knew the genre that I was working in.
But the other side of me, call it the religious or the spiritual or Gnostic side, which is not really necessarily a separate side, but just a different aspect of it, and which has been writing for a long time and writing books for a long time also, that's a more
What is one to say?
Spectative thing.
That's something more of surmise.
I just don't know.
I don't know whether this book, Omens of Millennium, will have the fate of what I thought was a very fine book, the one called The American Religion, which just about nobody read, or whether it will have a fate more like that of The Book of J.,
and the Western Canon.
I just have no idea.
That's what I mean also by saying that the book hasn't got a genre, I mean.
Vaporates.
What?
Vaporates to a degree.
I will acknowledge that.
I think when you say it doesn't have a genre, I think that if people don't really know where to, at least critics are accustomed to pigeonholing things.
It's a religious, it's a personal religious book.
of a rather unorthodox view of religion.
But it goes over some very strange bodies of material, ancient and modern, and tries to tie it together.
I just don't know what they're going to make of it.
There's a guy, Glenn read it to me over the phone last Sunday in the Baltimore Sun.
There was a piece by a guy named, gee, what's his name?
I don't think I'd heard of him before, and the name has slipped me now.
But he was very intelligent.
He saw exactly what the book was doing and why it was doing it.
So maybe, maybe, I don't know, maybe there will be a certain number of reviewers who will be able to figure it out.
There was a conference at Trinity College.
I didn't go to it, but it was a conference of
women literary of course this is one of the five groups that you write about in the western and of course they've basically agreed now that Sarah I mean they're really trying to find writers I know I know I mean they're going through the stage of beatification now I know and then of course when you achieve sainthood then I guess because they have done this that you are automatically enlisted in the roles of the canon
with a capital C. And, I mean, just because somebody says this is part of the canon, it doesn't make it part of the canon.
I mean, maybe I'm talking very stupidly here, but I guess I'm looking for a comment from you on this.
And I know we're revisiting territory.
Well, you know, what can one do?
I mean, does literature have to be relevant in a social... I'd like to get rid of the term feminist because the legitimate use of feminist is social, political, economic.
Feminist literary critics, they're not feminist, and they're not literary, and they're not critics.
It's like Freudian literary criticism, which is neither Freudian, nor literary, nor criticism.
Feminist literary criticism, it's not feminist.
There's someone who's out there working for Planned Parenthood.
There's someone who's out there agitating for equal treatment for women.
There's someone who's out there fighting for a woman's right to choose and so on.
There's people out there trying to do something about domestic violence and abuse of women.
The feminists in the academy are just part of a group, part of a sort of power grab
You know, they're the ginger and power freaks, as I call them.
They have no relation to so-called, I mean, they're not concerned with poor women or downtrodden women or women who are being abused and so on.
They're just concerned with the bureaucrats.
They're careerists.
They're commissars who happen to be human females, but
A lot of them are my former students.
And who teach literature institutions, and so therefore... And a great deal, in fact, of what calls itself feminist literary criticism started as a reaction against me.
A great deal of it comes out of the anxiety of influence, which they then denounce as, well, this is a male sexist sort of thing, etc., and then they go on from there.
I attended this conference in Boston over the weekend just for a couple of days.
Those are the fellows and girls who are trying to fight back.
who've invited me to join their ranks, but I've replied, well, I have sympathy.
Your name was mentioned repeatedly.
I said, I have some sympathy with you.
Indeed, the president is a very close friend, Roger Shattuck.
I haven't talked to Roger like that.
Roger is a terrific human being, and I'm very fond of him.
And Roger keeps saying, Harold, you have to join.
And I keep saying, no, no, no.
Remember, my motto is the Marxist one, the true Marx, Brad Shope.
I wouldn't be a member of any club that would have leave for a member.
I don't want to.
I mean, I see what they're trying to do.
Well, at the members' meeting, it was very interesting.
A good number, and there was no consensus reach, but a good number of these members want themselves to become more politically active and to make demands at the university.
And, you know, an equal member shouted them down.
I think that's self-defeating, don't you think?
If they become to fight the MLA and all these others... You can't fight the MLA.
It's a big, bloated beast.
You know what it really is now?
But I'd love you to put this in the column.
The MLA, even though most of its members would get furious at me for saying this.
I put it in my book.
Yeah, put it in my book.
Put it anywhere you want to.
Put it in both, if you want to.
Either or both.
The MLA, even though they would see themselves as politically opposed to the Christian coalition, they have everything in common with the Christian coalition.
That's good.
They're that kind of a mass pressure group.
They're a very bad business, indeed.
They have no relation to literary values.
How did that happen?
That was a pretty good group once upon a time.
My dear, I was prophetic in this, too.
I left the Yale English Department in 1976 when I got the Yale Corporation to appoint me professor of absolutely nothing, you know, studying professor of humanities without colleagues.
When I did, I also wrote a letter of resignation to the Modern Language Association and another one to the English Institute, in which I blasted both.
And that was 20 years ago, 1976.
And I said, you're not studying literature anymore.
You're just agitating, you know.
This has become a purely political kind of an operation.
You're fighting culture wars.
And you're destroying aesthetic and humane and scholarly and cognitive and intellectuals.
values, and I think that's absolutely true.
I call them parallel to the Christian coalition because the Christian coalition has nothing to do with Christianity.
It has everything to do with their upper bourgeois status and their wish to hold on to it and to impose their values on everybody else, which are not Christian values or Christian morals at all.
In the same way, the MOA pretend to stand, at least they used to pretend to stand for aesthetic values
values and aesthetic interests, but of course they don't even believe in that anymore, and they now make the aesthetic a curse word.
You know, there are no aesthetic values for that.
I remember duringwhen the Soviet Union was still the Soviet Union, and interviewing a number of Russian writers, and we were talking, and I remember the mandate then was you had to write under a
of course what you got was lousy literature yeah and what you get is lousy criticism out of these people it's not literary but i mean well my point is with and of course these people argue that for literature to be literature it has to be relevant and and relevant to what i mean and that and you can see where i'm going with this question and i wonder if you could
Well, I'm going to turn it on the other side.
I think we're approaching a point I really want to get.
No, there's a few more minutes to this side.
Go ahead.
Can I shoot a couple of pictures, by the way?
No, no, no.
I want to break in a moment anyway to pop to the bathroom.
This paper is a light-colored photograph.
Here's this.
Let me go on for a moment.
What this new book of mine has in common with the Western canon, the sense in which it really is a kind of more of a sequel to the Western canon,
and to say the American religion of the Book of J in my recent work, is that what ties together what I'm talking about in this elements of Millennium book and what I was talking about in the Western canon is that aesthetic values and spiritual values, even if they're not necessarily exactly the same, one thing is overwhelmingly uncommon between them.
It is a question of individuality.
It is a question of a solitary reader.
It is a question of a solitary meditator.
It is a question of the solitary and individual self.
And that, of course, is what these people deny in their emphasis on what they think is the communal.
But what can them do?
Let's go.
Did you say you were going to take a little break?
Yeah, I'll take a break in a moment, don't you?
I'm going to just, when you come back.
Sure.
I was just thinking about all this, and you'll want to turn this around anyway.
I'll be right back.
You don't mind covering these areas, I hope.